# Device simulation
Oxidized supports [150+ devices](/docs/Supported-OS-Types.md).
No developper has access to all of these devices, wich makes the task of
maintaining Oxidized difficult:

- issues can't be resolved because the developper has no access to the device.
- further developments can produce regessions.

In order to address this, we can simulate the devices. An example for a
simulation are the [model unit tests](/spec/model) but one could also simulate
a device within a ssh server.

The simulation of devices is curently focussed on ssh-based devices. This may
be extended to other inputs like telnet or ftp in future.

## YAML Simulation Data
The underlying data for the simulation is a [YAML](https://yaml.org/) file in
which we store all relevant information to the device. The most important
information is the responses the commands used in the oxidized models.

### Creating a YAML file with device2yaml
A device does not only output the ASCII text we can see in the console.
It adds ANSI-escape code for nice colors, bold and underline, \r and so on.
These are key factors in prompt issues so they must be represented in the YAML
file. We use the ruby string format with interpolations like \r \e and so on.
Another important point are trailing spaces at the end of lines. Some text
editors automatically remove trailing spaces, so we code them whith \x20.

Although a YAML file could be written by hand, this is quite a tedious task to
catch all the extra codes and code them into YAML. This can be
automated with the ruby script
[device2yaml.rb](/examples/device-simulation/device2yaml.rb).

`device2yaml` needs ruby and the gem [net-ssh](https://rubygems.org/gems/net-ssh/) to run. On debian, you can install them with `sudo apt install ruby-net-ssh`

You have to edit it and change some variables to fit you model:
```ruby
SSH_USER = 'oxidized'
SSH_HOST = 'localhost'
SSH_COMMANDS = [
  'show version',
  'show vtp status',
  'show inventory',
  'show running-config',
  'terminal length 0',
  'terminal width 0',
  'exit'
].freeze
SSH_CMD_TIMEOUT = 2
```
- `SSH_USER` is the user used to log into the device. The password will be
prompted interactively by the script.
- `SSH_HOST` is the hostname (or IP) of the device
- `SSH_COMMANDS` is the list of the commands the oxidized model sends to the
device. It is important that you enter exactly the commands used by the oxidized
model, an no abbreviation like `sh run`. Do not forget the `post_login`
commands if the oxidized have one.
- `SSH_CMD_TIMEOUT` it the timeout after which `device2yaml.rb` decides that
it has received all the output corresponding to the command. The timeout
counter is reset every time data is received. If your device needs more than 2
seconds to respond to a command, you can adjust the timeout here. Most of the
time, this ought to be enougth.

When run without arguments, `device2yaml.rb` will print the YAML file to the
standard output. You can use `-o <model_HW_SW.yaml>` to store the data in a
YAML file.

`device2yaml.rb` takes some time to run because of the timeout configured in
`SSH_CMD_TIMEOUT`. The example above will need at least 14 seconds to complete.

### Publishing the YAML simulation file to oxidized
Publishing the YAML simulation file of your device helps maintaining oxidized.

You should pay attention to remove or replace anything you don't want to share
with the rest of the world, for example:
- Passwords
- IP Adresses
- Serial numbers

You can also shorten the configuration if you want - we don't need 48 times the
same config for each interface, but it doesn't hurt either.

The YAML simulation file sould be stored under /examples/device-simulation/. It
sould be named so that it can be easily recognised: model, hardware type,
software version and optionaly a description if you need to differentiate two
YAML files:

- #model_#hardware_#software.yaml
- #model_#hardware_#software_#description.yaml

Examples:

- garderos_R7709_003_006_068.yaml


### YAML Format
The yaml file has three sections:
- init_prompt: describing the lines send by the device before we can send a
command. It usualy includes motd banners, and must include the first prompt.
- commands: the commands the model sends to the network device and the expected
output.
- oxidized_output: the expected output of oxidized, so that you can compare it
to the output generated by the unit test. This is optional and ony used for
unit tests

The outputs are multiline and use yaml block scalars (`|`), with the trailing \n
removed (`-` after `|`). The outputs includes the echo of the given command and
the next prompt. Some escape characters are interpreted, currently \n, \r,
\x\<octal char number\>, \\\\

Here is a shortened example of a YAML file:
```yaml
---
init_prompt: |-
  \e[4m\rLAB-R1234_Garderos#\e[m\x20
commands:
  show system version: |-
    show system version
    grs-gwuz-armel/003_005_068 (Garderos; 2021-04-30 16:19:35)
    \e[4m\rLAB-R1234_Garderos#\e[m\x20
# ...
  exit: ""
oxidized_output: |-
  # grs-gwuz-armel/003_005_068 (Garderos; 2021-04-30 16:19:35)
  #\x20
# ...
```


